feat(docs): Add Getting Started with Kestra Blog Post (#1141)
kestra-io/docs: content/blogs/2024-04-05-getting-started-with-kestra.md

---
title: "Getting Started with Kestra"

> description: "This blog post lists 10 Kestra features that have changed my work for the better."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "If you're new to Kestra, this post will introduce you step by step to building your first workflows and configuring failure notifications."
```

copy-paste issue :) change however you like

date: 2024-04-05T10:00:00
category: Solutions
author:
  name: Will Russell
  image: "wrussell"
image: /blogs/2024-04-05-getting-started-with-kestra.png
---

Kestra is an event driven data orchestration platform that’s highly flexible and easy to use. This guide is going to go through the basics and get you started building your own pipeline!

> Originating as a platform for data orchestration, Kestra finds itself well equipped for managing all types of CI/CD pipelines with it’s highly flexible interface and huge range of plugin support. Through this blog post, I’m going to show you how to get setup with Kestra and set up a simple workflow to run a Python script every hour and send the result as a Discord notification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Originating as a platform for data orchestration, Kestra finds itself well-equipped to manage all types of pipelines with its highly flexible interface and a huge range of plugins. Through this blog post, I’m going to show you how to get setup with Kestra and set up a simple workflow to run a Python script every hour and send the result as a Discord notification.
```

CI/CD is one of the least common use cases, so worth cutting or replacing with data pipelines

Author: Thanks for clarifying! I will get this updated!

## Installation

> Kestra is open source meaning anyone can run it on their machine for free. There is a cloud version coming soon for those who want to start making flows straight away, however for now we'll set it up locally. To get it setup, you’ll need to make sure you have Docker installed on your machine and run the following command to start up your instance!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kestra is open source meaning anyone can run it on their machine for free. To get it setup, you’ll need to make sure you have Docker installed on your machine and run the following command to start up your instance!
```

given Beta is coming in August by the earliest, maybe let's not mention just yet 👍

```bash
docker run --pull=always --rm -it -p 8080:8080 --user=root \
  -v /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock \
  -v /tmp:/tmp kestra/kestra:latest-full server local 
```

Once you’ve run this command, head over to your browser and open [https://localhost:8080](https://localhost:8080) to launch the interface so we can start building workflows!

## Properties

> Before we start making our workflows, it’s worth understand a few fundamental properties that we’ll use to build everything!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before we start making our workflows, it’s worth learning a few fundamental properties that we’ll use to build everything!
```

Workflows are referenced as Flows and they’re declared using YAML making it very readable as well as works with any language! Within each flow, there are 3 required properties you’ll need:

- `id` which is the name of your flow. This can’t be changed once you’ve executed your flow for the first time.
- `namespace` which allows you to specify the environments you want your flow to execute in, e.g. production vs development
- `tasks` which is a list of the tasks that will execute when the flow is executed, in the order they’re defined in. Tasks contain an `id` as well as a `type` with each different type having their own additional properties.

To help visualise it, here's an example:

```yaml
id: getting_started
namespace: example
tasks:
  - id: hello_world
    type: io.kestra.core.tasks.log.Log
    message: Hello World!
```

Everything builds off of these 3 properties but there’s a few more optional properties that you’ll want to use to give you full flexibility.

- **Inputs:** Instead of hardcoding values into your flows, you can set them as constant values separately. Great if you plan to reuse them in multiple tasks. An input might look like this: `{{ inputs.webhook_url }}` .

> - **Outputs:** Tasks will often generate outputs that you’ll want to pass on to a later task. Outputs let you connect both variables as well as files to later tasks. An output of a variable could look like this: `"{{ outputs.script.vars['output'] }}"`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Outputs:** Tasks will often generate outputs that you’ll want to pass on to a later task. Outputs let you connect both variables as well as files to later tasks. An output of a variable could look like this: `"{{ outputs.script.vars.myoutput }}"`
```

a matter of preference but I'd only use the subscript notation [] only if variable name has hyphens

Author: Ah didn't realise you could also do it this way. I'll update to reflect that as it's much clearer. Also making notes for the docs improvements as I struggled to understand the syntax for outputs for Python.

- **Triggers:** Instead of manually executing your flow, you can setup triggers to execute it based on a set of conditions such as time schedule or a webhook.

The last thing to mention is Plugins! To help you build powerful flows, you can utilise Plugins for tools and platforms you already use to help speed things up! Every plugin is different but we'll cover a few examples later in the blog.

While that might be a lot of properties to get your head around, the Kestra platforms interactive topology will help us configure these correctly!

## Building our First Flow

> For our first flow, we're going to setup a simple automation that runs a Python script once every hour and sends its output to Discord as a notification! Let's start with the Python part! Firstly, we need a Python file for Kestra to execute! We’ll use something really simple that generates an output from an API request. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For our first flow, we're going to set up a simple automation that runs a Python script once every hour and sends its output to Discord as a notification. Let's start with the Python part. Firstly, we need a Python file for Kestra to execute! We’ll use something really simple that generates an output from an API request. 
```

I noticed throughout the post that there are many exclamation marks. Consider removing it if it gets too much (e.g. here, it feels not needed)

![python_search](/blogs/2024-04-05-getting-started-with-kestra/python_search.png)

Now you’re probably wondering, how do I get my Python file into Kestra? We can use the Editor in the left side menu to create this file on the platform and save it in a new folder called `scripts` as `api_example.py`. On top of this, we can add the property `namespacesFiles` in our flow and set that as enabled to allow our flow to see other files!

![editor](/blogs/2024-04-05-getting-started-with-kestra/editor.png)

Once we’ve done that, we just need to make sure we install any dependencies before the script runs by using the `beforeCommands` property to create and activate a virtual environment and install the dependencies into it. One last thing: we'll need to also make a `requirements.txt` with the `requests` library inside it so this runs without any issues!

Now let’s test this by saving our flow and executing it! Our flow should look like the following below:

> ```yaml
> id: api_example
> namespace: example
> tasks:
> 	- id: python_script
> 	    type: io.kestra.plugin.scripts.python.Commands
> 	    namespaceFiles:
> 	      enabled: true
> 	    runner: PROCESS
> 	    beforeCommands:
> 	      - python3 -m venv .venv
> 	      - . .venv/bin/activate
> 	      - pip install -r scripts/requirements.txt
> 	    commands:
> 	      - python scripts/api_example.py
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml
id: api_example
namespace: example
tasks:
  - id: python_script
    type: io.kestra.plugin.scripts.python.Commands
    namespaceFiles:
	    enabled: true
    runner: PROCESS
    beforeCommands:
	    - python3 -m venv .venv
	    - . .venv/bin/activate
	    - pip install -r scripts/requirements.txt
    commands:
	    - python scripts/api_example.py
```
```

cross-check indentation here

![discord_ui](/blogs/2024-04-05-getting-started-with-kestra/discord_ui.png)

For our Discord message, we’ll need to give this task an `id` , as well as a Webhook URL which we can get from Discord. While nothing else is required, there’s plenty of customisation to make the message feel more polished and clearer such as adding a title and avatar. For this example, we’ll call the task `send_notification` and change the username to be *Kestra*. We can also add an Avatar by using the URL of the GitHub Organisation profile picture. 

Instead of hard coding this straight into the `avatarUrl` box, we can create an **input** to allow us to reuse this later on in case we send notifications to multiple platforms for example. Our input should look like the example below which we can put above the tasks in our flow, similar to what you would do with constants in Python.

```yaml
inputs:
  - id: kestra_logo
    type: STRING
    defaults: https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/59033362?v=4
```

> While we’re creating inputs, we can also make our Webhook URL an input incase we want to reuse it too. Discord has a [great guide](https://support.discord.com/hc/en-us/articles/228383668-Intro-to-Webhooks) on how to generate the Webhook URL for a specific channel so all the messages are sent there. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While we’re creating inputs, we can also make our Webhook URL an input in case we want to reuse it, too. Discord has a [great guide](https://support.discord.com/hc/en-us/articles/228383668-Intro-to-Webhooks) on how to generate the Webhook URL for a specific channel so all the messages are sent there. 
```

We can use [crontab.guru](https://crontab.guru) to help us figure out what the correct cron schedule expression would be to run once every hour. This tool is super helpful in visualising what the different expressions mean, as well as with a handy glossary to understand the syntax!

![crontab](/blogs/2024-04-05-getting-started-with-kestra/crontab.png)

This cron schedule expression will execute it at minute 0 of every hour so we can now put that into our cron property in our trigger.

```yaml
triggers:
  - id: hour_trigger
    type: io.kestra.core.models.triggers.types.Schedule
    cron: 0 * * * *
```

When we look at our topology view, we can now see our trigger has been correctly recognised. There’s no further actions needed to setup the trigger, it will work as soon as you’ve saved your flow! But it is worth noting that if you want to disable it, you can add a `disabled` property set to true so you don’t have to delete it. Helpfully, you can find all these extra properties through the topology edit view!

![topology](/blogs/2024-04-05-getting-started-with-kestra/topology.png)

> With that set up, we now have our fully functioning flow that can make an API request to GitHub through our Python script, output a value from that request to our Kestra logs as well as send it as a Discord notification. And on top of that, it will automatically execute once every hour! To recap, our flow should look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With that set up, we now have our fully functioning flow that can make an API request to GitHub through our Python script, output a value from that request as well as send it as a Discord notification. And on top of that, it will automatically execute once every hour! To recap, our flow should look like this:
```

nitpick: outputs are stored in the DB  backend + file outputs are stored in internal storage (so not logs)

Author: This is referring to the log task in the flow as I left that in to show 3 tasks unless I'm misunderstanding?
